We are interviewing Mike Mahoney today at his home
in Northeast Dallas. And Mike, I'd like to have you
begin by recalling
your first efforts at planning in Texas and then
the events that you were connected with that you
feel were really significant for Texas. and for
planning education and so forth. OK. Maybe, Bob,
it would be best to back up and explain, because
it's hard for me to talk about my planning career in
Texas without also talking about the segments in
and out of the state which were taking place in
Arizona. I started in the planning office in
Tucson, which was then a city county planning
office. in January of 1948.
Worked there under a man by the name of Ed Wilson.
Then in September of 1948, took a job in El Paso as
assistant city planning engineer, that strange
kind of title. under Walter E. Stockwell, who was
then the planning engineer for the city and had
been for many, many years.
I was there until 1950, then in grad school at
University of Oklahoma, then went back to Tucson
in 1951 and worked again in the city county
planning department. This time, though, under
Andre M. Foer, Andre Melville for. He was related
somehow or other to the famous Melville of Moby
Dick. And Andy was a very forthright, down to
earth, school of hard knocks planner who had a very
deep sense of appreciation for design, a very deep
sense of appreciation for human relations.
Gained a great deal from Andy. And two years after
that, In 1953, I had the good fortune to be
designated as planning director for the city of
Austin. So I was in Austin for the five-year period
of 53 to 58. In 58,
the lure of Arizona drew me back, plus some bad
health experiences in Austin. And the doctor
said, you better get out. And I went to Yuma,
Arizona as head of the city county planning
department. Small operation, but one that was
very satisfying because I was able to work with a
community that was really interested in trying to
do something following some rather unhappy
planning experiences that they had had. Some
people in the city viewing it to be good, and some
people in the city and the county viewing it not to
be so good.
For two years after that, after those four years, I
was in Phoenix as assistant planning director
when John Beatty was director. And then in 1964,
became planning director in Fort Worth. Jerry
Brownlee was then city manager. He was one of LP
Cookingham's protégés. And it was partly because
of that influence that I decided to make the switch
and come back to Texas and was in the planning, as
head of the planning office for the city of Fort
Worth from 64 to 68. In 68,
I left the city, went into private work, and
remained in private practice essentially on a
very active basis for about six years after that.
However, during that time, then I decided that
what I found myself doing was really trying to
teach a lot of people in city government and in the
community how to push the right buttons, which
levers to pull, what doors to open and which doors
to close in order for them to accomplish their
civic objectives, community objectives.
planning commissions, and boards of adjustment,
and library boards, and park and recreation
boards, citizen groups, neighborhood
associations, and so on. And that was really kind
of a culmination of things that turned me from
being the, as much as I liked the design side of
planning, I moved very strongly into the
community relations side and went on to pursue a
doctorate in adult continuing ed at North Texas.
And then in, let's see, it's been 10 years ago, 11
years ago now, in 1975, took a position at East
Texas State University and really became the
program director for the graduate program in
adult continuing education at East Texas with
both master's and doctoral programs. But all
through those 10 years, I have continued to be
involved as I was for roughly 10 years before that
in some kind of adjunct types of planning
activities, particularly with the Soil
Conservation Service, very regularly, once or
twice a year for them in their Fort Worth Regional
Training Center, which is now their National
Training Center.
earlier for Southern Methodist University,
teaching through the Department of Real Estate
and Regional Science under Sid Reagan, teaching
basic course in planning and then one graduate
course in public policy and business
administration combination. And before that, at
TCU and the Urban Studies program and along the way
at UT Arlington for the fifth year design classes
in the School of Architecture and many many years
before that as a critic for the University of Texas
at Austin in the fifth year design classes in
architecture and planning. So and earlier than
that I guess yes when I was in Phoenix I was teaching
for what was then called Phoenix Evening College.
It's now the Maricopa County Community College
District and was very much involved there.
Educationally,
my interest was really multifaceted because my
first degree was in civil engineering from
University of New Mexico, then graduate work at
both UT Austin and Oklahoma in city and regional
planning. Then, because of some of my interests on
more mundane things of academia, I became one of
the key players in designating the site for the
Yuma County Community College District's
eventual campus of 640 acres. east side of Yuma,
became also instrumental in the locating of the
south campus for the Tarrant County Junior
College District. And I've kind of kept my oar in
the pond all along on the education side of the
ledgers over the years, as well as on the planning
side. Now, where do you want me to back up? And what
do you want me to fill in from all of this? Well, why
don't you go back to your first experience in
municipal planning. That would be in Austin. And
any consultants that were active in Austin at that
time? Well, the earlier ones were really within
the state of Texas were really El Paso. And I think
that one was somewhat unusual in that Walter
Stockwell, who was then the planning engineer.
And remember, this was in a period, the latter part
of the 40s. Dan Ponder was then the mayor and very
positive, aggressive individual.
The city of El Paso in 1928 had
designated or had hired as a consultant Mr.
Kessler and I have a copy of that plan oh you do have
okay and the Kessler plan came out of work that
Walter Stockwell was very much involved in I think
particularly with reference to that there were
two things that somewhat stand out as
accomplishments over the years since And some of
these have only been accomplished within the last
eight or ten years. One was the construction of a
scenic route around Mount Franklin on the north
side of downtown El Paso, more or less the north
side of El Paso. And that has become, over the
years, pretty much of a shortcut route from the
northeast part of El Paso to the northwest part of
El Paso. More significantly, though, quite a few
miles further to the north, Walter Stockwell,
encouraged, I think, by Mr. Kessler, had worked
very strenuously in trying to carry out the one
proposal that Kessler made, which I'm sure a lot of
people thought was purely pie in the sky. And that
was the building of a road through the Franklin
Mountains, I say through, kind of meandering
through the arroyos and the canyons, through an
area called McKelligan Canyon. And that now
connects the far north side of El Paso on the east
with the far north side of El Paso on the west, a road
that is really quite an accomplishment
engineering-wise. It was a route that Kessler had
the good sense to see was ultimately going to be
needed. And this was in a day and time when El Paso,
as I recall, maybe only had 60,000 people. And he
was looking to the time when it would be 10 times
that size and that the need would be very real. I
think that's perhaps the major contribution.
Walter Stockwell's major contribution was his
tenacity. in digging away and pushing for things.
Although he had had some physical health problems
over the years, he hung in there very tenaciously
like an animal just clawing onto its prey. And he
would not let go. And he said, we will do these
things. And he would find ways with changes in the
mayors who were the actual administrators of the
city, even though they changed political beliefs
and so on, he would constantly find a way to
convince them to move ahead on projects. And so I
think of the planters in the state probably,
although he came from a very different time and a
very different orientation, Walter Stockwell
probably had in his own unique way as much that is
merited in the way of dedication and
accomplishment as any planner in the state. What
was the relationship between Stockwell and
Cunningham?
I had left, and John Cunningham came in much later.
I don't know what the relationship was. I'm sorry,
I can't really speak to that. When I was in Austin
from 53 to 58, I went in under a set of circumstances
that were very, I think, very beneficial to me and
very unusual. The city of Austin had just then,
within a matter of 60 days before, 45 days before,
adopted a new city charter. And for the first time,
the city of Boston had a section in its charter
devoted to city planning. And that section of the
charter has since been amended once, maybe twice.
But that section of the charter gave a very strong
recognition to the role of, as it was designated,
the master plan. gave a very strong
responsibility to the Planning Commission to
move forward on a master plan for the city. During
the time that I was there, Martin from the School of
Architecture at UT was appointed to the Planning
Commission. He was one of the new appointees
coming in under the charter revision, charter
reform program. And really, this charter was a
wholesale revamping of the old city charter. And I
mean like 95% of it was a complete redo in concept,
in philosophy, in structure, everything. Walter
Sehome was the city manager and the man I reported
to. And you wouldn't. Yeah, I'm sorry. Oh, you want
to go ahead? Yeah. All right. Immediately
following the organization of the Planning
Commission under the new charter,
I was asked to establish some guidelines for the
employment of a planning consultant to help us
move quickly on a master plan. And in the process,
we had sent out invitations to a number of
individuals. Needless to say, we contacted the
old faithfuls like Bartholomew and Segoe. And
then we had some others who were not as well known,
but in various ways had something to offer us. I
felt city manager was not particularly
knowledgeable By the way, Walter was an
electrical engineer by background, came through
the electric utility, which was municipally
owned. And so lots of things turned on decisions
that really affected the electric utility. That
was the first decision point. Then after that,
then the community came in as the decision point.
So many times, the profit and loss statement in the
electric utility controlled a lot of what
happened in city government. Strange. But
normally also the electric utility made lots of
money for the city and that was fine, but a lot of the
city budget was dependent on that electric
utility. So everything sort of shifted to what is
going to be good for the electric utility and if
that's good for that element then obviously we're
going to make money and therefore that will help
underwrite the rest of the operating budget of the
city. Planning being one of those that, of course,
was dependent upon the various revenue sources.
In the process,
we had the experience of a last minute applicant
who had not been contacted by us in the regular
process. through a contact he had made, he just
happened to be coming through town, I think, as
best I know, he had either been,
for some reason, made contact with Hugo Leipziger
at UT Austin or Martin Kermesie, and at that point,
and there was really within only a matter of four or
five days of the closing of the the bid time or
proposal time, we had an 11th hour and 59th minute
submittal by Hal Wise. And looking back, I must
say, at the time, I was a little annoyed because I
hadn't had a chance to visit with Hal, tell him what
the situation was on the ground. But at the same
time, Looking back, I can also say I was very
pleased with the energy that Hal Wise's operation
provided us. That was the plus part of the whole
business. Hal brought in Harry Halliton. I don't
remember which city Harry was in before that.
He also brought in Bruce Weber as a researcher,
W-A-Y-B-U-R.
Harry G. Halliton, Harry the Horse Halliton, as he
was known, was the resident planner. And he was
very effective in organizing a local staff for
Halwise. technician and a couple of people that
were employed on an occasional basis and a
secretary and then Bruce Weber came in
periodically in various parts of the research
program Bruce is and I think this may say something
about him Bruce's has long since passed away but
kind of a side story. Bruce was in the service as a
translator. He at that time had a PhD in German and
history when he went into the service during World
War II. He was assigned to Patton's unit when they
were moving in up the Italian peninsula and he
wound up wherever it was that Patton's
headquarters were to be located just before
Patton was killed. And Bruce was assigned to the
intelligence unit specifically to gather
information on the Krupp interests and the other
industrial interests. One of his jobs was to find
out where the various records were of all these
German industrialists, because these were not at
the company locations in Germany. The
industrialists saw the handwriting on the wall,
they knew that the Allies were soon going to
overpower Germany and the Axis, and they spirited
their records away to all kinds of places. Bruce
and a couple of other and he was like a tech sergeant
or staff sergeant at that time. He told this story
of having located some of the Krupp records, and it
was a whole trunk full of Krupp industrialist
records on the third or fourth floor of a house in
this small village where they were going through
How he got onto this, I don't know, except by
process of just asking people questions about
things that had been brought in. And he and another
soldier were carrying this trunk of materials
down to their jeep to take it into the intelligence
office so that the materials could be gone over
piece by piece in preparation for the Nuremberg
trials. And as Bruce said, described the
situation as typical in so many European
buildings, the stairwells are very narrow. And he
said they were having trouble with this very, very
heavy trunk. And he said it must have weighed 300
pounds, because it was full of paper. And he said in
the process, they made a turn, and they had trouble
tipping the trunk so they could carry it down. And
he said, I was the man on the bottom. of the stairs
carrying the trunk down and he said all at once
behind me there was this booming voice that cried
out something like this soldier you're in my way
and Bruce said he turned around and looked and here
it was George Patton and he said sir I'm sorry, I'm
in your way, but I don't have anywhere else to go.
And so Patton quizzed him right then and there.
What was he doing there? Why were they moving this
trunk? He explained what his mission was. And
Patton, at that point, usually with his gloves on
and everything, pulled his gloves off and said,
here, let me give you a hand.
And he said at that stage, everything changed. He
said Patton helped them down the next two flights
and helped them load the truck on the jeep. Then
proceeded to write out a note. He took down Waber's
name and said, Sergeant Waber, if I can do anything
for you, here's an official pass. You may come to my
offices or my tent anytime you need to. and
Bruce said he was so shocked by the whole thing
because Patton's reputation of course was always
one of being very gruff and pretty demanding of
everyone but he said it was a very heartening
experience and he said as a matter of fact he did go
in a day or two later and he had a drink with Patton
and he said Patton really expressed his
appreciation for the work that the intelligence
people were doing because he said without that
work this is the way he told waver he said without
that work we will not be able to win this war
so much for the side story bruce was an extremely
accomplished researcher and a very good writer
you mentioned that he had been he came from marin
county Yes, I think Bruce was, I believe, located
at Marin County before he went to work for Hal Wise.
What year are we talking about? Well, Hal came in in
54,
let's see, yes, I guess it was 1954. To Austin. To
Austin, right. And Bruce came along just within a
matter of, four weeks behind me. So this was
probably the middle, late spring or middle of
1954.
When Hal Wise came to Austin, I think there was one
immediate contribution, and that was that
through a series of community meetings, And there
were quite a few of them. I don't remember the
number now, except that there was one like every
three or four weeks for probably a period of four or
five months, six months.
I remember three questions of how always ask, and
you've probably heard these before. After a
presentation of some of the problems and some of
the that the city was having and some of the
information that came out of the basic census
records and land use records and so on that we
already had compiled to some extent. Hal would
always ask people, what do you like most, what do
you like least about your city, and what do you want
to see changed? Of course, a very good format of a
paradigm for ferreting out public opinion. But it
built, I think, a lot of people who were very much
concerned about the way the city was going and a
confidence that our planning effort our
comprehensive planning effort would be
reasonably successful what came out of the plan
it's beyond the plan itself which was as I see it a
pretty good document over the long haul. In fact, a
remarkably good document over the long haul. And
I'm speaking between the mid-1950s and the
mid-1980s.
While the plan has been updated, many of the basic
concepts that were contained in the planning
recommendations, which did involve involve a
very heavy consultant input, but also involve a
substantial amount of citizen reflection on
those inputs. A lot of those concepts and
principles have been adhered to down through the
years since. One of the initial, or I should say one
of the initial, one of the initial issues the
public expressed concern about was the Missouri
Pacific Railroad which came down through the west
side of Austin north-south alignment to the west
side of Austin that route
was always a point of contention because to get a
full load fully loaded train out of Austin going
upgrade it would usually take about four to six
diesel units to pull the train. And that train
could not go more than about 20 miles an hour going
up that grade. In fact, that was, at that time, the
steepest grade in the state of Texas for any
distance at all. It was then about a 10-mile grade,
and it was the steepest one in the state.
That, of course, as a point of contention for a lot
of citizens, resulted in the establishment of the
Missouri Pacific Freeway alignment. So-called
Mopac. The Mopac, right. Mopac Boulevard, as it's
known. And that now, of course, has been extended
way on to what would be called the northwest side of
Austin.
15 miles out from downtown. And also recently to
the south. Yeah, and has been extended to the south
now across the Reviton.
The concepts of that particular thing, the whole
concept of that corridor was one of the issues. A
second one that Hal did capitalize on although I
think in the years since it has not been preserved
quite as well as it should have been, was the very
strong commitment to the recreation facilities
in Austin. Beverly Sheffield had been recreation
director for the city for a number of years. He was
an aquatics man, a person who believed very
strongly in aquatics experiences for kids
starting at age five or four or younger, and he was
the instigator of the concept of free
neighborhood pools.
That largely came about because sometime during
the 1930s, Austin had the drowning of a small
youngster in one of the large municipal pools,
which was the one down on Riverside. down next to
the river.